4/12/24, 1:18 PM Internet protocol suite - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_protocol_suite 1/16
Diagram of the first internetworked
connectionInternet protocol suite
The Internet protoco l suite , commonly known as TCP/IP , is a framework for organizing the set
of communication protocols  used  in the Internet  and similar computer network s acco rding to
functional criteria . The foundational protocols in the suite are the Transmission Control Protocol
(TCP), the User Datagram Protocol  (UDP), and the Internet Protocol  (IP). Early versions of this
networking mode l were known as the Department of Defense  (DoD ) model  because the
research and development were funded by the United States Department of Defe nse thro ugh
DARPA .
The Internet protocol suite provides end-to-end data communication  specifying how data should be
packetized, addres sed, transmitted, routed , and received. This functionality is organized into four
abstraction layers , which classify all related protocols according to each protocol's scope of
networking.[1][2] An implementation of the layers for a particular application forms a protocol stack .
From lowest to highest, the layers are the link layer , containi ng comm unication methods for data
that rema ins withi n a single networ k segment (link); the internet layer , providing internetworking
between independent networks; the transport layer , handling  host-to-host communicati on; and the
application layer , providing process-to-process data exchange for applications.
The technical standard s underlyi ng the Internet protocol suite and its constituent protocols are
maintained by the Internet Engineering Task Force  (IETF). The Internet protocol suite predates the
OSI model , a more comprehensive reference framework for general networking systems.
Initially referred to as the DOD Internet Arch itecture Model , the
Internet protocol suite has its roots in research and development
sponsored by the Defense Advanced  Research Projects Agency
(DARPA ) in the late 1960s.[3] After DARPA initiated the
pioneering ARPANET  in 1969, Steve Crocker  established a
"Networking Wor king Group" which developed a host-host
protocol, the Network Control Program  (NCP).[4] In the early
1970s, DARPA started work on several other data transmission
technologies, including mobile packet radio, packet satellite
service, local area networks, and other data networks in the
public and private domains. In 1972, Bob Kahn  joined the
DARPA Information Proce ssing Technology Office , where he worke d on both satellite packet
networks and ground-based radio packet networks, and recognized the value of being able to
communicate across both. In the spring of 1973, Vinton Cerf  joined Kahn with the goal of designing
the next protocol generation for the ARPANET to enable internetworking .[5][6] They drew on the
experience from the ARPANET research community, the International Network Working Group,
which Cerf chaired, and researchers at Xerox PARC .[7][8][9]History
Early research