4/12/24, 1:19 PM Network congestion - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_congestion 1/8Network congestion
Network conges tion  in data networking  and queueing theory  is the reduced quality of service
that occu rs when a network node or link is carrying more data than it can handle. Typical effects
include queueing delay , packet loss or the blocking of new connecti ons. A consequence of
congestion is that an incremental increase in offered load  leads either only to a small increase or
even a decrease in network throughput .[1]
Network protocols  that use aggressive retransmissions  to compensate for packet loss due to
congestion can increase congestion,  even after the initial load has been reduced to a level that
would not normal ly have induced network congestion. Such networks  exhibit two stable states
under the same level of load. The stable state with low throughput is known as congestive
collapse .
Networks use congestion cont rol and congestion avoi dance  tech niques to try to avoid
collapse. These include: exponential backo ff in proto cols such  as CSMA/CA  in 802.11  and the
similar CSMA/CD  in the original Ethernet , window  reduction in TCP , and fair queueing  in devices
such as routers  and network switches . Other techniques that address congestion include priority
schemes which transmit some packets with higher priority ahead of others and the explicit
allocation of network resources to specific flows through the use of admission control .
Network resources are limited, including router  proc essing time and link throughput . Resource
contention  may  occur on networks in several common circumstances. A wireless LAN is easily
filled by a single personal computer .[2] Even on fast computer networks, the backbone  can easily
be congested by a few servers and client PCs. Denial-of-service attacks  by botnets  are capable of
filling even the largest Internet backbone  network  links, generating large-scale network
congestion. In telephone networks, a mass call event  can overwhelm digital telephone circuits, in
what can otherwise be defined as a denial-of-service attack .
Congestive collaps e (or congestion collapse) is the condition in which congestion prevents or limits
useful communication. Congestion collapse generally occurs at choke points in the network, where
incoming traffic exceeds outgoing bandwidth. Connection points between a local area network  and
a wide area  network  are common choke points. When a network is in this condition, it settles into a
stable state where traffic demand is high but little useful throughput is available, during which
packet delay  and loss occur and quality of service  is extremely poor.
Congestive collaps e was identified as a possible problem by 1984.[3] It was first obser ved on the
early Internet in October 1986,[4] when the NSFNET  phase-I backbone dropped three orders of
magnitude from its capacity of 32 kbit/s to 40 bit/s,[5] which continued until end nodes started
implementing Van Jacobson  and Sally Floyd 's congestion control between 1987 and 1988.[6] When
more packets  were sent than could be handled by intermediate routers, the intermediate routers
discarded many packets, expecting the end points of the network to retransmit the information.Network capacity
Congestive collapse