4/12/24, 12:59 PM Computer network - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_network 1/25Computer network
A computer netwo rk is a set of computers  sharing resources located on or provided by network
nodes . Compu ters use common communication protocols  over digital  interconnections  to
communicate with  each other. These  interconnections are made up of telecommunication network
technologies based  on physically wired, optical , and wire less radio-frequency  meth ods that may  be
arranged in a variety of network topologies .
The nodes of a computer network can include personal computer s, servers , networking hardw are,
or other specialize d or general-purpose hosts . They are identified by network addresses  and may
have hostnames . Hostnames serve as memorable labels for the nodes and are rarely changed after
initial assignment. Network addr esses serve for locating and identifying the nodes by
communication protocols such as the Internet Protocol .
Computer network s may be classified  by many criteria, including the transmission medi um used to
carry signals, bandwidth , communications protocols  to organize network traffic , the network size,
the topology, traffic control  mechanisms, and organizational intent.
Computer network s support many applications  and services , such as access to the World Wide
Web , digital video  and audio , shared use of application and storage servers , printers  and fax
machines , and use of email and instant messaging applications.
Computer networking may be considered a branch of computer science , computer enginee ring,
and telecommunications , since it relies on the theoretical and practical application of the related
disciplines. Compu ter networking was influenced by a wide array of technological developments
and historical milestones.
In the late 1950s, a network of computers was built for the U.S. military Semi-Automatic
Ground Environment  (SAGE) radar  system[1][2][3] using the Bell 101 modem . It was the first
commercial modem  for computers, released by AT&T Corporation  in 1958. The modem
allowed digital data  to be transmitted over regular unconditioned telephone lines at a speed of
110 bits per second (bit/s).
In 1959, Christopher Strachey  filed a patent application for time-sharing  and John McCarthy
initiated the first project to implement time-sharing of user programs at MIT .[4][5][6][7] Strachey
passed the concept on to J. C. R. Licklider  at the inaugural UNESCO Information Processing
Conference  in Paris that year .[8] McCarthy was instrumental in the creation of three of the
earliest time-sharing systems (the Compatible Time-Sharing System  in 1961, the BBN Time-
Sharing System  in 1962, and the Dartmouth Time Sharing System  in 1963).
In 1959, Anatoly Kitov  proposed to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union a detailed plan for the re-organization of the control of the Soviet armed forces and of
the Soviet economy on the basis of a network of computing centers.[9] Kitov's proposal was
rejected, as later was the 1962 OGAS  economy management network project.[10]
In 1960, the commercial airline reservation system semi-automatic business research
environment  (SABRE) went online with two connected mainframes .History
4/12/24, 12:59 PM Computer network - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_network 3/25
Network Packet
Common network topologiesaccess and use resources provided by devices on the network, such as printing a document on a
shared network printer or use of a shared storage device. A network allows sharing of files, data,
and other types of information giving authorized users the ability to access information stored on
other com puters on the network. Distributed computing  uses computing resources across a
network to accomplish tasks.
Most modern computer networks use protocols based on
packet-mode transmission. A network packet  is a formatted
unit of data  carried by a packet-switched network .
Packets consist of two types of data: control information and
user data (payload). The control information provides data the
network needs to deliver the user data, for example, source and
destination network addresses , error detection  codes, and
sequencing information. Typically, control information is
found in packet headers  and trailers , with payload data  in
between.
With pack ets, the bandwidth  of the transmission medium can be better shared among users than if
the netwo rk were circuit switched . When one user is not sending packe ts, the link can be filled with
packets from other users, and so the cost can be shared, with relatively little interference, provided
the link is not overused. Often the route a packet needs to take through a network is not
immediately available. In that case, the packet is queued  and waits until a link is free.
The phys ical link technologies of packet networks typically limit the size of packets to a certain
maximum transmission unit (MTU). A longer message may be fragmented before it is transferred
and once the packets arrive, they are reassembled to construct the original message.
The physical or geographic locations of network nodes and
links generally have relatively little effect on a network, but the
topology of interconnections of a network can significantly
affect its throughput and reliability . With many technologies,
such as bus or star networks, a single failure can cause the
network to fail entirely. In general, the more interconnections
there are, the more robust the network is; but the more
expensive it is to install. Therefore, most network diagrams are
arranged by their network topology  which is the map of logical interconnections of network hosts.
Common topologies are:
Bus network : all nodes are connected to a common medium along this medium. This was the
layout used in the original Ethernet , called 10BASE5  and 10BASE2 . This is still a common
topology on the data link layer , although modern physical layer  variants use point-to-point  links
instead, forming a star or a tree.
Star network : all nodes are connected to a special central node. This is the typical layout found
in a small switched Ethernet  LAN, where each client connects to a central network switch, andNetwork packet
Network topology