4/12/24, 1:16 PM Network layer - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_layer 1/3Network layer
In the seven-layer OSI model  of computer networking , the network layer  is layer 3. The
network layer is responsible for packet forwarding  including routing  thro ugh interme diate
routers .[2]
The netw ork layer provides the means of transferring variable-length  network packets  from a
source to a destination host  via one or more networks. Within the service layering semantics of the
OSI (Open Systems Interconnection ) network architecture, the network layer responds to service
requests from the transport layer  and issues service requests to the data link layer .
Functions of the network layer include:
Connectionless communication
For example, Internet Protocol  is connectionless, in that a data packet can travel from a
sender to a recipient without the recipient having to send an acknowledgement. Connection-
oriented protocols exist at other , higher layers of the OSI model.
Host addressing
Every host in the network must have a unique address that determines where it is. This
address is normally assigned from a hierarchical system. For example, you can be :
"Fred Murphy" to people in your house,
"Fred Murphy , 1 Main Street" to Dubliners,
"Fred Murphy , 1 Main Street, Dublin" to people in Ireland,
"Fred Murphy , 1 Main Street, Dublin, Ireland" to people anywhere in the world.
On the Internet, addresses are known as IP addresses  (Internet Protocol).
Message forwarding
Since many networks are partitioned into subnetworks and connect to other networks for
wide-area communications, networks use specialized hosts, called gateways or routers , to
forward packets between networks.
The TCP/IP model  describes the protocols used by the Internet.[3] The TCP/IP model has a layer
called the Internet layer , located above the link layer . In many textbooks and other secondary
references, the TCP/IP Internet layer is equated with the OSI network layer. However, this
comparison is misleading, as the allowed characteristics of protocols (e.g., whether they are
connection-oriented or connection-less) placed into these layers are different in the two models.
The TCP/IP Internet layer is in fact only a subset of functionality of the network layer. It describes
only one type of network architecture, the Internet.
The network layer is responsible for fragmentation and reassembly  for IPv4  packets that are larger
than the smallest MTU  of all the intermediate links on the packet's path to its destination. It is the
function of routers  to fragment packets if needed, and of hosts  to reassemble them if received.Functions
Relation to TCP/IP model
Fragmentation of Internet Protocol packets