4/12/24, 1:00 PM Transmission Control Protocol - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_Control_Protocol 1/21Transmission Control
Protocol
Protocol stack
AbbreviationTCP
Developer(s)Vint Cerf and Bob
Kahn
Introduction1974
Based on Transmission
Control Program
OSI layer Transport layer (4)
RFC(s) RFC 9293Transmission Control Protocol
The Transmission Control Protocol  (TCP ) is one of the main protocols  of the Internet
protocol suite. It origin ated in the initial network implementation in which it complemented
the Internet Protocol  (IP). Therefore, the entire suite is commonly referred to as TCP/IP .
TCP provides reliable , ordered, and error-checked  delivery of a stream  of octets  (bytes)
between applications running on hosts communicating via an IP network. Major internet
applications such as the World Wide Web , email, remote administration , and file transfer
rely on TCP, which  is part of the Transport layer  of the TCP/IP suite. SSL/TLS  often runs on
top of TCP.
TCP is connection-oriented , and a connection between client and server is established before
data can be sent. The server must be listening (passive open) for conne ction requests from
clients before a connection is established. Three-way handshake  (active open),
retransmission , and error detection adds to reliability but lengthens latency . Applications
that do not require  reliable data stream  service may use the User Datagram Protocol  (UDP)
instead, which provides a connectionless  datagram  serv ice that prioritizes time over reliability. TCP employs network congestion
avoidance . However, there are vulnerabilities in TCP, including denial of service , connection hijacking , TCP veto, and reset
attack .
In May 1974, Vint Cerf  and Bob Kahn  described  an internetworking  protocol for sharing resources using packet switching  among
network nodes.[1] The authors had been working with Gérard Le Lann  to incorp orate concepts from the French CYCLADES
project into the new network.[2] The specification  of the resulting protocol, RFC 675 (Specification of Internet Transmission
Control Program ), was written by Vint Cerf, Yogen Dalal, and Carl Sunshin e, and published in December 1974.[3] It contains the
first attested use of the term internet , as a shorthand for internetwork .
A central control component of this model was the Transmission Control Program  that incorporated both connection-oriented
links and datagram services between hosts. The monolithic Transmission Control Program was later divided into a modular
architecture consis ting of the Transmission Control Protocol  and the Internet Protocol . This resulted in a networking model that
became known informally as TCP/IP , although formally it was variously referred to as the Department of Defense (DOD) model,
and ARPANET  model, and eventually also as the Internet Protocol Suite .
In 2004, Vint Cerf  and Bob Kahn  received the Turing Award  for their foundational work on TCP/IP.[4][5]
The Tran smission Control Protocol provides a communication service at an intermediate level between an application program
and the Internet Protocol. It provides host-to-host connectivity at the transport layer  of the Internet model . An application does
not need to know the particular mechanisms for sending data via a link to another host, such as the required IP fragmentation  to
accommodate the maximum transmission unit of the transmission medium. At the transport layer, TCP handles all handshaking
and transmission details and presen ts an abstraction of the network connection to the application typically through a network
socket  interface.
At the lower levels of the protocol stack, due to network congestion , traffic load bala ncing , or unpredictable network behavior,  IP
packets may be lost, duplicated, or delivered out of order . TCP  detects thes e problems, requests re-transmission  of lost data,
rearranges out-of-order data and even helps minimize network congestion to reduce the occurrence of the other problems. If the
data still remains undelivered, the source is notified of this failure. Once the TCP receiver has reassembled the sequence of octets
originally transmitted, it passes them to the receiving application. Thus, TCP abstracts  the application's communication from the
underlying networking details.
TCP is used exten sively by many internet applications, including the World Wide Web  (WWW) , email, File Tran sfer Prot ocol ,
Secure Shell , peer-to-peer file sharing , and streaming media .
TCP is optimized for accurate delivery rather than timely delivery and can incur relatively long delays (on the order of seconds)
while waiting for out-of-order messa ges or re-transmissions of lost messages. Therefore, it is not particularly suitable for real-
time appl ications such as voice over IP. For such applications, protocols like the Real-time Transpo rt Protocol  (RTP) operating
over the User Datagram Protocol  (UDP) are usually recommended instead.[6]Historical origin
Network function