Comp 6461 – Fall 20 23 Theory Assignment 2  - Page 1 
Redistribution or publication of this document or its text, by any means, is strictly prohibited  
   COMP 6461  - Fall 2023 
 Theory Assignment 2   
Due Date & Submission Format: Please see course outline. 
Warning: Redistribution or publication of this document or its text, by any 
means, is strictly prohibited. Additionally, publishing the solution publicly, 
at any point of time, will result in an immediate filing of an academic 
misconduct.  
 
1) E-mail requires both sender and receiver mail servers to communicate directly. Further , all 
communications must be  made between these two servers using SMTP.  
i) Is it possible to allow intermediate servers as part of this communications? If so, 
what are the main advantages of doing so? If no, why is that infeasible, or what are 
the disadvantages o f utilizing it if it was feasible ?  
ii) Considering webmail, are there any cases when SMTP between the two mail servers can be replaced by HTTP? Explain why, or why not.  
 
2) Client -Server architecture can be used for file transfer; however, it is assumed/said to  be 
inferior in comparison to P2P for such operations. Considering a small number of 
interacting hosts that need to share files, is it true that client -server would perform badly? 
Explain clearly your answer. You must indicate why the number of interacting hosts/peers 
is significant in determining whether or not client -server is suitable for file transfer.  
 
3) Show, through a detailed scenario/example, why GBN protocol would fail in case the 
sender’s window size exceeds 2
k-1, where k is the number of frame bits for the sequence 
number.  
Considering that the window size is set to what it is expected to be. Is there any possibility 
that GBN could produce the same performance obtained by the Unrestricted Protocol? If 
no, explain clearly why this is infeasible. If so, explain clearly how, or under what 
conditions, GBN could produce the same performance of the Unrestricted Protocol.   
 
4) Explain how UDP frames can end up TCP frames being delayed, theoretically, indefinitely! 
If so, what would you propose as changes to UDP to mitigate this problem? Your solution 
must mainly keep the advantages/purpose of UDP, while mitigating the problem at hand.   
5) Show, through an example, how checksum could be inconclusive of error detection (i.e. does not guarantee that errors can be detected). In your example, assume transmitted data 
is broken into 24- bit chunks by the protocol utilizing checksum.  In case errors  are detected 
by checksum, does that fully (100%) guarantee that errors must have actually occurred?  
  

Comp 6461 – Fall 20 23 Theory Assignment 2  - Page 2 
Redistribution or publication of this document or its text, by any means, is strictly prohibited  
 6) Show through an example (sketch the scenario), how TCP uses the credit system to ensure 
that a sender would not overflow a receiver. In your scenario, a ssume that initial 
communication establishment resulted in sender (host A in general since it also behaves  as 
a receiver) starting with frame # 194, while the receiver (host B in general since it also 
behave s as sender) starts at frame # 329. Assume that t he data size of all these exchanged 
frames is 100 bytes. Further, assume that at start, each of the hosts allows the other one a credit of 200. The rest of the scenario is up to you, however, you need to show at least one 
case when both of them coincidentl y set the credit to 0 at the same time.  
 
7) Some may strongly argue that it is much better to use network -assisted congestion control 
instead of end- to-end congestion control. Do you support such argument? Clearly explain 
why or why not, and indicate the advantages of your choice over the other one.  
Why does TCP use end- to-end congestion control over the Internet?  
 
8) With VC networks, the frame does not include the receiver address. Explain clearly how this would still work! Give a detailed scenario  that expl ains how deliveries to the receiver 
can still be obtained. Show all needed tables at the routers in support to your scenario.    
9) What is CIDR? What are the main advantages of using CIDR? Are there any major disadvantages to this technique?  
 
10)  With NAT rout ers, many machines over the Internet would have the same IP address! 
Explain how this would still work. Explain also how a P2P non- NAT host can establish a 
connection with another peer located under a NAT.