Comp  6461 – Fall 20 23 Theory Assignment 3  - Page 1 
Redistribution or publication of this document or its text, by any means, is strictly prohibited  
   COMP 6461  - Fall 2023 
 Theory Assignment 3   
Warning: Redistribution or publication of this document or its text, by any 
means, is strictly prohibited. Additionally, publishing the  solution publicly, 
at any point of time, will result in an immediate filing of an academic 
misconduct.  
   
1) What is the main difference between Pure Aloha and Slotted Aloha ? Are there any 
circumstances where Pure Aloha would perform better than Slotted Aloha? If so, give 
such circumstances/conditions. If no, explain why Pure Aloha could never perform better 
that Slotted Aloha.  
  
2) Given a network with 9 routers as shown in the figure  below . Assume the utilization of 
center -based spanning tree construction, where router D is assigned as the center (or 
root) router. Assume routers join the tree in the following order: C, A, H, B, F, G, E, and 
I. Show the final constructed spanni ng tree for that given network.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3) Consider two substitution ciphers. One adds a value of i to the ASCII code of the 
plaintext character. The other adds a value of j to the plaintext character. All additions are 
modulo 256. Now consider a double -encryption method that adds i to each plainte xt 
character and then adds j to the resulting ciphertext character to get another ciphertext 
character. Again, all calculations are modulo 256 How much more secure is this double 
encryption when compared with either single -encryption method? Explain your a nswer.  
 
4) Consider the bit string 001011010101000011111101001101 and the key 10011. Use the key to encrypt and then decrypt the string using bit level ciphering.  
 
5) Suppose you were trying to crack an encryption method that used a 64- bit key. Assuming 
a brute  force attack, how many keys per second must you try to crack the code in 30 
days?  
A 
C 
D G 
B 
E F H 
I 
Comp  6461 – Fall 20 23 Theory Assignment 3  - Page 2 
Redistribution or publication of this document or its text, by any means, is strictly prohibited  
  
  
6) Three broad classes to multiple access techniques exist, which are: channel partitioning, 
random access and taking turns. In general, it is assumed that any network would use one of these techniques or the other. However, cable Internet access networks utilize all three  
techniques. Describe  how this is done by such networks, and explain how the utilization 
of any of these techniques does not conflict with the utilization of the other  two.  
 
7) In general, fully- connected topology is exhaustive and very unl ikely to be used for the 
construction of a network.  
a. Are there any clear and significant advantages of such topology? Explain clearly.  
b. Explain why it is unlikely that such topology be used for network construction. You should clearly indicate the major di sadvantages of such topology.  
c. While this topology seems to make little sense for the construction of networks, in the general terms, it is actually used as part of Data Centers  to connect Tier -1 and 
Tier-2 switches. Explain clearly the major advantages of  such utilization in data 
centers. You should provide some example that shows, through some numerical values, the obvious advantages  of such utilization .   
  
8) Assume the utilization of Hamming Codes for single -bit error correction.  
a. What is the total number of bits that need to be transmitted if the original data 
string has 11 bits? Which positions will be covered by the different parity bits?  
b. What is the total number of bits that need to be transmitted if the original data 
string has 19 bits? Which position s will be covered by the different parity bits?  
 
9) Token Ring LANs  have the clear advantage of avoiding collisions, which is surely not 
the case for networks, i.e. E thernet, that use  buses as the main segment to connect the 
different devices. In spite of that, Ethernet LANs are capable today of providing a 
superior performance in comparison to Token Ring LANs. Explain how the Ethernet was 
able to achieve that regardless of the  collisio n issues. In particular, your  answer should 
consider: 1) the disadvantages of Token Rings, and 2) Switched Ethernet.