4/12/24, 12:46 PM Linguistic Linked Open Data - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_Linked_Open_Data 1/9
LLOD Cloud (2016-05-24)Linguistic Linked Open Data
In natural language processing , linguistics , and neighboring  fields, Linguistic Linked Open
Data (LLOD)  describes a metho d and an interdis ciplinary community concerned with creating,
sharing, and (re-)using language resources in accordance with Linked Data  prin ciples. The
Linguistic Linked Open Data Cloud  was conceived and is being maintained by the Open
Linguistics Working Group (OWLG) of the Open Knowledge Foundation , but has been a point of
focal activ ity for several W3C  commun ity group s, research projects, and infrastructure efforts since
then.
Linguistic Linked Open Data describes the publication of data
for lingu istics and natural language processing using the
following principles:[1]
Data should be openly licensed using licenses such as the
Creative Commons  licenses.
The elements in a dataset should be uniquely identified by
means of a URI.
The URI should resolve, so users can access more
information using web browsers.
Resolving an LLOD resource should return results using
web standards  such as the Resource Description
Framework  (RDF).
Links  to other resources should be included to help users discover new resources and provide
semantics.
The primary benefits of LLOD have been identified as:[2]
Representation: Linked graphs are a more flexible representation format for linguistic data.
Interoperability: Common RDF models can easily be integrated.
Federation: Data from multiple sources can trivially be combined.
Ecosystem: Tools for RDF and linked data are widely available under open source licenses.
Expressivity: Existing vocabularies help express linguistic resources.
Semantics: Common links express what you mean.
Dynamicity: W eb data can be continuously improved.
The home of the LLOD cloud diagram is under linguistic-lod.org[3]
Aside from gathering metadata and generating the LLOD cloud diagram , the LLOD community is
driving the development of community standards with respect to vocabularies, metadata and best
practice recommendations.
According to the state-of-the-art overview by Cimiano et al. (2020),[4] these include:
for modelling lexical resourcesDefinition and Development
LLOD vocabularies