4/12/24, 12:48 PM Text mining - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Text_mining 1/6Text mining
Text mining , text data mining  (TDM ) or text analytics  is the process of deriving high-quality information  from text. It involves "the discovery
by computer of new, previously unknown information, by automatically extracting information from different written resources."[1] Written resources
may inclu de websites , books , emails , reviews , and articles. High-quality informat ion is typically obtained by devising  patterns and trends by means
such as statistical pattern learning . According to Hotho et al. (2005) we can distinguish between three different perspectives of text mining:
information extra ction , data mining , and a knowledge discov ery in databases  (KD D) process.[2] Text mining usually involves the process of
structuring the input text (usually parsing , along with the addition of some derived linguistic features and the removal of others, and subsequent
insertion into a database ), derivin g patterns within the structured data , and finally evalua tion and interpretation of the output. 'High quality' in text
mining usually refers to some comb ination of relevance , novelty , and interest. Typical text mining tasks include text categ orization , text clustering ,
concept/entity extraction, production of granular taxonomies, sentiment analysis , document summarization , and entity relation modeling  (i.e.,
learning relations between named entities ).
Text analysis involves information retrieval , lexical analysis  to study word frequency distributions, pattern recognition , tagging /annotation ,
information extraction , data mining  techniques including link and association analysis, visualization , and predictive analytics . The overarching goal
is, essentially, to turn text into data for analysis, via the application of natural language processing  (NLP), different types of algorithms  and anal ytical
methods. An important phase of this process is the interpretation of the gathered information.
A typical application is to scan a set of documents written in a natural language  and either model the document  set for predictive classific ation
purposes or populate a database or search index with the information extracted. The document  is the basic element when starting with text mining.
Here, we define a document as a unit of textual data, which normally exists in many types of collections.[3]
Text analytics  describes a set of linguistic , statistical , and machine learning  techniques that model and structure the information content of textual
sources for business intelligence , exploratory data analysis , research , or investigation.[4] The term is rough ly synonymous with text mining; indeed,
Ronen Feldman  modified  a 2000 description of "text mining"[5] in 2004 to describe "text analytics".[6] The latter term is now used more frequently in
business settings while "text mining " is used in some of the earliest application areas, dating to the 1980s,[7] notably life-sciences research and
government intelligence.
The term text analytics also describes that application of text analytics to respond to business problems, whether independently or in conjunction
with quer y and analysis of fielded, numerical data. It is a truism that 80 percent of business-relevant information originates in unstructured  form,
primarily text.[8] These techniques and processes discover and present knowledge – facts, business rules , and relationships  – that is otherwise locked
in textual form, impenetrable to automated processing.
Subtasks—components of a larger text-analytics effort—typically include:
Dimensionality reduction  is important technique for pre-processing data. Technique is used to identify the root word for actual words and reduce
the size of the text data.
Information retrieval  or identification of a corpus  is a preparatory step: collecting or identifying a set of textual materials, on the W eb or held in a
file system , database , or content corpus manager , for analysis.
Although some text analytics systems apply exclusively advanced statistical methods, many others apply more extensive natural language
processing , such as part of speech tagging , syntactic parsing , and other types of linguistic analysis.[9]
Named entity recognition  is the use of gazetteers or statistical techniques to identify named text features: people, organizations, place names,
stock ticker symbols, certain abbreviations, and so on.
Disambiguation—the use of contextual  clues—may be required to decide where, for instance, "Ford" can refer to a former U.S. president, a
vehicle manufacturer , a movie star , a river crossing, or some other entity .[10]
Recognition of Pattern Identified Entities: Features such as telephone numbers, e-mail addresses, quantities (with units) can be discerned via
regular expression or other pattern matches .
Document clustering : identification of sets of similar text documents.[11]
Coreference : identification of noun phrases  and other terms that refer to the same object.
Relationship, fact, and event Extraction: identification of associations among entities and other information in texts.
Sentiment analysis  involves discerning subjective (as opposed to factual) material and extracting various forms of attitudinal information:
sentiment, opinion, mood, and emotion. Text analytics techniques help analyze sentiment at the entity , concept, or topic level and distinguish
opinion holders and objects.[12]
Quantitative text analysis is a set of techniques stemming from the social sciences where either a human judge or a computer extracts semantic
or grammatical relationships between words in order to find out the meaning or stylistic patterns of, usually , a casual personal text for the purpose
of psychological profiling  etc.[13]
Pre-processing usually involves tasks such as tokenization, filtering and stemming.
Text mining technology is now broadly applied to a wide variety of government, research, and business needs. All these groups may use text mining
for record s manag ement and searching documents relevant to their daily activities. Legal professionals may use text mining for e-discovery , for
example. Governm ents and military groups use text mining for national security  and intelligence purposes. Scientifi c researchers incorporate text
mining approaches into efforts to organize large sets of text data (i.e., addressing the problem of unstructured data ), to determine ideasText analytics
Text analysis processes
ApplicationsInformation extractio
task of automatical
structured informa
unstructured and/or s
machine-readable docum
electronically represen
Typically, this involv
human language texts 
natural language proc
Recent activitie s in
document processing 
annotation and content e
images/audio/video/docu
be seen as information ex